Add blog for polaris and hudi integration (#3804)
apache/polaris: blog-hudi-polaris.md

> # Using Apache Polaris as a Catalog for Apache Hudi Tables

Reviewer: Can you please add the ASF header here ?

## What is Apache Hudi?

[Apache Hudi](https://hudi.apache.org/) (Hadoop Upserts Deletes and Incrementals) is an open-source
data lakehouse platform that brings database-like capabilities to the data lake. Hudi was originally
created at Uber to solve large-scale streaming ingestion and is widely adopted across the industry.

Key differentiators:

- **Incremental processing** — first-class support for incremental reads and writes, enabling
  efficient pipelines that only process changed data.
- **Table types** — Merge-on-Read (MOR) tables optimise for write-heavy workloads; Copy-on-Write
  (COW) tables optimise for read-heavy workloads.
- **Built-in table services** — clustering, compaction, and cleaning run as managed services,
  reducing operational overhead.
- **Record-level change data capture (CDC)** — track inserts, updates, and deletes at the record
  level for downstream consumers.
- **Near-real-time upserts** — streaming ingestion with sub-minute latency for mutable datasets.

## What is Apache Polaris (and why catalogs matter)?

[Apache Polaris](https://polaris.apache.org/) is an open catalog service that implements the

> Apache Iceberg REST Catalog protocol as well provides a **Generic Tables API** for other popular table

Reviewer 2: Let's remove the word "popular", maybe we can just say non-Iceberg table formats. although we support popular format today, we don't block support of unpopular format also :)

formats such as Apache Hudi, Delta Lake, etc. A catalog provides centralised metadata management, engine-agnostic table discovery, and
a single place to enforce role-based access control (RBAC). Instead of every engine maintaining its
own pointer to every table, engines ask the catalog: "where is table X, and am I allowed to read
the underlying metadata and data files that belong to the table?"

Under the hood, the Polaris's Spark plugin (`SparkCatalog`) detects when a table uses the Hudi

> provider and delegates Hudi-specific operations — creating the `.hoodie` by delegating to hudi's spark catalog implemenation `HoodieCatalog`, while persisting the table's catalog entry

Reviewer 2: not all operations goes to HoodieCatalog, maybe we can just say "delegating to the proper Catalog implementation"

through the Polaris REST API. 

Below we will run thru a simple example of how users can leverage these technologies for building a governed lakehouse.

## Prerequisites

| Requirement | Version | Notes                               |
|---|---|-------------------------------------|

> | Java | 17+ | Required by Polaris server          |

Reviewer 2: +1

| Apache Spark | 3.5.x  |                                     |

> | Apache Hudi bundle jar | `hudi-spark3.5-bundle_2.12:1.1.1` | Single uber jar with all Hudi deps  |

Reviewer 2: does hudi only allow scala 2.12, or it allows both?

| Polaris Spark client jar | `polaris-spark-3.5_2.12` | The Polaris Spark catalog plugin    |
| Docker + Docker Compose | Latest stable | For running the Polaris server      |

## Hands-on Tutorial

### Step 1 — Start Polaris

Save the following as `docker-compose.yml` and run `docker compose up -d`:

```yaml
services:

  polaris:
    image: apache/polaris:latest
    ports:
      - "8181:8181"
      - "8182:8182"
    environment:
      POLARIS_BOOTSTRAP_CREDENTIALS: POLARIS,root,s3cr3t
      polaris.realm-context.realms: POLARIS
      quarkus.otel.sdk.disabled: "true"
      polaris.features."SUPPORTED_CATALOG_STORAGE_TYPES": '["FILE","S3","GCS","AZURE"]'
      polaris.features."ALLOW_INSECURE_STORAGE_TYPES": "true"
      polaris.readiness.ignore-severe-issues: "true"
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "curl", "--fail", "http://localhost:8182/q/health"]
      interval: 2s
      timeout: 10s
      retries: 10
      start_period: 10s
```

> > **Tip:** The example above uses local storage for simplicity. For S3 or other object storage,

Reviewer 2: this part is just for starting the polaris locally, right? maybe you can point to our deploy polaris locally for simplicity. for example here https://polaris.apache.org/releases/1.3.0/getting-started/deploying-polaris/local-deploy/

8       | Hank       | 7.5   | San Francisco | 2025-01-16
9       | Ivy        | 30.0  | Chicago       | 2025-01-17
10      | Jack       | 14.8  | New York      | 2025-01-15
```

```sql
-- Filter by city and sort by fare
SELECT ride_id, rider_name, fare
FROM rides_hudi
WHERE city = 'New York'
ORDER BY fare DESC;
```

```
ride_id | rider_name | fare
--------|------------|------
3       | Charlie    | 15.0
10      | Jack       | 14.8
1       | Alice      | 12.5
7       | Grace      | 11.2
```

### Step 6 — Verify table registration in Polaris

**Via Spark SQL:**

```sql
SHOW TABLES IN rides;
```

```
namespace | tableName  | isTemporary
----------|------------|------------
rides     | rides_hudi | false
```

### Step 7 — Cleanup

```sql
DROP TABLE rides_hudi;
DROP NAMESPACE rides;
```

Then stop the Polaris server:

```bash
docker compose down
```

## Current Limitations

The Polaris Hudi integration is under active development. As of today, the following limitations
apply:

| Operation | Status | Details |
|---|---|---|
| `CREATE TABLE ... USING HUDI` (with `LOCATION`) | Supported | Must include an explicit `LOCATION` clause |

> | `CREATE TABLE ... USING HUDI` (without `LOCATION`) | Not supported | Raises `UnsupportedOperationException` |

Reviewer 3: I am wondering if we could give a default location, like `namespace location + table name`. Not a blocker for this blog at all.

Reviewer 2: @flyrain @jbonofre i think that is going to be non-trival, spark today uses spark managed location, if you don't put the location, spark uses its' own way to construct the location, which unfortunately is not passed into the rest call today.  There is a task in spark community to pass the location during the call, but not done yet.

Reviewer 3: Can Spark read the namespace's property to get its location and concatenate it with the table name?

Reviewer 2: We can definitely make spark do that, but those all require change in spark.

| `CREATE TABLE ... AS SELECT` (CTAS) | Not supported | Raises `IllegalArgumentException` |
| `ALTER TABLE ... RENAME TO` | Not supported | Raises `UnsupportedOperationException` |
| `ALTER TABLE ... SET LOCATION` | Not supported | Raises `UnsupportedOperationException` |

> | Credential vending | Not supported | Generic tables do not yet support credential vending; configure storage credentials directly in Spark |

Reviewer 2: +1

## Next Steps

The Polaris community is actively working on closing these gaps:

- **Credential vending for generic tables** — enabling Polaris to vend short-lived storage

>   credentials for Hudi, Delta, and other generic table formats, bringing them to parity with the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Credential vending for generic tables** — enabling Polaris to vend short-lived storage
  credentials for Hudi, Delta, and other generic table formats based on the priviledges defined 
```
